Jason kind of looks like an overgrown Hot Topic kid. He's got a handful of piercings and tends to run around in black rock band t-shirts and paint-spotted Converse and the like, with a pair of headphones around his neck. But not the mopey dreary kind of mall goth--he's all smiles, very friendly and outgoing (and loud), loves talking to strangers and finding out about their lives and launches easily into passionate rambles about whatever he's excited about at the moment.  It's maybe a little bit of a front, but just because he likes to think that if he pretends to be happy and okay then maybe he can trick himself into believing that he is. He does his best to live in the moment, often acting on whims and impulses, trying to outrun his own mind. He has a strong inclination to overthink and ruminate if he gives himself the chance.

Jason lives more in a world of fiction than reality, with a constant stream of quotes and borrowed imagery running through his head. He thinks too hard about everything and he's prone to getting so deep in his own conceptions and idealizations that he loses touch with the reality of a situation. He has a tendency toward idolizing people and toward over-dependence; this leads to a toxic relationship with Zack in high school that (in most timelines) he never really gets over. He has a hard time letting things go, and sometimes collapses into a burning ball of guilt and self-loathing. He's stubborn and rebellious and irreverent, sometimes contrary just for the sake of it even. 

He owns a butterfly knife and it's very precious to him. He gets way too into philosophy and he has big feelings he doesn't understand. He's very loudly queer. He draws and paints and plays guitar and loves prog rock. He likes sitting outside in thunderstorms. He practices Thelema.

Jason grew up in an abusive home; his older sister Mel has basically been his lifeline and more or less raised him when their parents wouldn't. He has a history of struggling with self-harm, suicide attempts, bipolar depression, and in some timelines substance abuse. He and Soo Jin have been best friends since around middle school; they figured out queerness together and helped each other come out. In timelines where he's trans, he typically has his gender figured out before high school. He falls in love with and starts dating Zack during high school; in most timelines their relationship becomes toxic and they break up around graduation. Things splinter off a lot after that point, but this is the timeline I currently work with the most: he moves to Boston for college right after high school but becomes dysfunctional and fails out. He moves back in with his sister in Columbus to recover and then moves to Pittsburgh to join Soo Jin who is attending college there. He and Soo Jin remain roommates for several years, eventually ending up in a d/s relationship. He may eventually reconnect with Zack and start dating him again, with his simultaneous relationship with Soo Jin serving as a stabilizing force.
